Add CFEP for package renames (#64)
conda-forge/cfep: cfep-XX.md

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Guidelines for renaming packages </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td>

>     Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jaime.rogue@gmail.com&gt;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jaime.rogue@gmail.com&gt; Matthew R. Becker &lt;becker.mr@gmail.com&gt
```

</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Oct 26, 2025 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Oct 26, 2025 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda-forge/admin-requests/pull/1711 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

This CFEP describes the principles informing how and when to rename a package in conda-forge.
Two cases are described depending on the status of the target name:

- Unclaimed names: A package already present in conda-forge wants to use a new name currently unclaimed.
- Names in use: A package, already present or about to be submitted, wishes to use a name already in use.

## Specification

### Unclaimed names

When an existing package wants to be renamed to a currently unclaimed name, the process is uncontroversial and straight-forward. Two approaches are possible:

- The new name needs to be registered to the originating feedstock in `feedstock-outputs` (or equivalent). Once approved, a PR in the feedstock adding the new output may proceed normally. The old name is usually kept as an alias output for backwards compatibility. In this case, the feedstock retains the name of the original name.

> - The original feedstock is archived and the package is re-submitted to `staged-recipes` (or equivalent) under the new name. The old package name should be added as an alias output for backwards compatibility, and registered as a valid output of the new feedstock in `feedstock-outputs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The new name needs to be registered to the originating feedstock in `feedstock-outputs` (or equivalent). Once approved, a PR in the feedstock adding the new output may proceed normally. The old name MUST be kept as an alias output for backwards compatibility. In this case, the feedstock retains the name of the original name.
- The original feedstock is archived and the package is re-submitted to `staged-recipes` (or equivalent) under the new name. The old package name MUST be added as an alias output for backwards compatibility, and MUST be registered as a valid output of the new feedstock in `feedstock-outputs`.
```

### Names in use

The blanket policy in this case is that an existing package name may not be used by a different project. In exceptional cases, the old name may be reallocated provided that:

> - The old project is either inactive or abandoned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The old project is abandoned. Factors that can help to indicate if a project is abandoned include, but are not limited to, the project's git repo being archived, the project's distributions no longer being available (e.g., yanked artifacts on PyPI), etc.
```

> - There are ways to install both projects without conflicts or mixups. This includes ensuring that version numbers do not overlap and that repodata patches are applied unambiguously. When necessary, measures like marking old packages as broken or moving them to a new label may be applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There are ways to install both projects without conflicts or unintentionally installing one project versus the other.
- The version number ranges of the projects do not intersect.
- The repodata patches for the old project (if any) do not change the repodata of the new project. Adjustments to the patches for the old project can be made, but they MUST produce the same modifications to the old artifacts.
- The old project's artifacts are all marked with the `broken` label. 
- The old project's artifacts are all marked with the correct `feedstock epoch label` (see above). 
```

> The original feedstock may not be reused, and must be archived.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The original feedstock MUST NOT be reused, and MUST be archived.
```

> In case of disagreement, the core team may resolve the issue at their discretion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The core team may resolve any ambiguities or disagreements on feedstock reuse at their sole discretion. Further, the core team reserves the right to refuse to allow a feedstock to be reused at their sole discretion.
```

    Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jaime.rogue@gmail.com&gt;, Matthew R. Becker &lt;becker.mr@gmail.com&gt;, Axel Obermeier &lt;h.vetinari@gmx.com&gt;
</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Oct 26, 2025 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Oct 26, 2025 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda-forge/admin-requests/pull/1711 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

This CFEP describes the principles informing how and when to (re)name a package in conda-forge.
Two cases are described depending on the status of the target name:

- Unclaimed names: A new package or a package already present in conda-forge wants to use a new name currently unclaimed.
- Names in use: A package, already present or about to be submitted, wishes to use a name already in use.

## Specification

This CFEP follows [RFC 2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119) in its use of certain keywords (e.g., MUST).

### Unclaimed Names

#### New Feedstocks & Name Squatting

- Unclaimed package names are typically available on a first-come-first-served basis and can be claimed by submitting a recipe for a package via `staged-recipes` (or equivalent).

> - The core team reserves the right to prevent the use of certain names for any reason. Typical reasons the core team may prevent the use of a certain name include, but are not limited to, typo squatting, ambiguity, violations of the code of conduct, conflicts with important infrastructure, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The core team reserves the right to prevent the use of any package name for any reason. Typical reasons the core team may prevent the use of a package name include, but are not limited to, typo squatting, ambiguity, violations of the code of conduct, conflicts with important infrastructure, name conflicts with recipes in the `bioconda` channel, etc. 
```

> - Pre-registering or squatting on a namespace in anticipation of future use is not allowed unless expressly approved by the core team via a vote or some other procedure decided at their discretion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Pre-registering or squatting on a namespace in anticipation of future use is not allowed unless approved by the core team.
```

> - Pre-registering or squatting on a namespace in anticipation of future use is not allowed unless expressly approved by the core team via the consent of at least three core members, and no dissent (in case of dissent, this can be solved by a vote within the core team). The core team MUST be `@`-mentioned on the relevant PR/issue and this PR/issue MUST stay open for at least one week. For the duration of this process (from the time core gets pinged until an answer is given), no other packages can use the names in question.

Author: I wish we could encode this in the governance as a standardized way of "approving a change without calling a vote", so it can be reused across CFEPs and we don't have slightly different rules for each CFEP. But maybe if this is needed elsewhere it can be referred to as "CFEP XX delegated approval" or something like that. Can we give it a name so we can refer to it easily in the future?

> - Pre-registering or squatting on a namespace in anticipation of future use is not allowed unless expressly approved by the core team via the consent of at least three core members, and no dissent (in case of dissent, this can be solved by a vote within the core team). The core team MUST be `@`-mentioned on the relevant PR/issue and this PR/issue MUST stay open for at least one week. For the duration of this process (from the time core gets pinged until an answer is given), no other packages can use the names in question.

Reviewer: Actually, I'd rather not have this procedure defined here and instead leave the CFEP ambiguous. We can and should hold a direct governance vote defining this procedure.

```suggestion
- Pre-registering or squatting on a namespace in anticipation of future use is not allowed unless expressly approved by the core team via a vote or some other procedure decided at their discretion.
```

Author: Fine with me!

<table>
<tr><td> Title </td><td> Guidelines for (Re)Naming Packages </td>
<tr><td> Status </td><td> Draft </td></tr>
<tr><td> Author(s) </td><td>

>     Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jaime.rogue@gmail.com&gt;, Matthew R. Becker &lt;becker.mr@gmail.com&gt

Reviewer 2: Happy to join as author if you'd like
```suggestion
    Jaime Rodríguez-Guerra &lt;jaime.rogue@gmail.com&gt;, Matthew R. Becker &lt;becker.mr@gmail.com&gt;, Axel Obermeier &lt;h.vetinari@gmx.com&gt;
```

</td></tr>
<tr><td> Created </td><td> Oct 26, 2025 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Updated </td><td> Oct 26, 2025 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Discussion </td><td> https://github.com/conda-forge/admin-requests/pull/1711 </td></tr>
<tr><td> Implementation </td><td> NA </td></tr>
</table>

## Abstract

This CFEP describes the principles informing how and when to (re)name a package in conda-forge.
Two cases are described depending on the status of the target name:

- Unclaimed names: A new package or a package already present in conda-forge wants to use a new name currently unclaimed.
- Names in use: A package, already present or about to be submitted, wishes to use a name already in use.

## Specification

This CFEP follows [RFC 2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119) in its use of certain keywords (e.g., MUST).

### Unclaimed Names

#### New Feedstocks & Name Squatting

- Unclaimed package names are typically available on a first-come-first-served basis and can be claimed by submitting a recipe for a package via `staged-recipes` (or equivalent).

> - The core team reserves the right to prevent the use of certain names for any reason. Typical reasons the core team may prevent the use of a certain name include, but are not limited to, typo squating, ambiguity, violations of the code of conduct, conflicts with important infrastructure, etc.

Reviewer 2: squating -> squatting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The core team reserves the right to prevent the use of certain names for any reason. Typical reasons the core team may prevent the use of a certain name include, but are not limited to, typo squatting, ambiguity, violations of the code of conduct, conflicts with important infrastructure, etc.
```

> - Pre-registering or squatting on a namespace in anticipation of future use is not allowed unless expressly approved by the core team via the consent of at least three core members. The core team MUST be `@`-mentioned on the relevant PR/issue and this PR/issue MUST stay open for at least one week.

Reviewer 2: SGTM in principle, but I think we need to account for disagreements
```suggestion
- Pre-registering or squatting on a namespace in anticipation of future use is not allowed unless expressly approved by the core team via the consent of at least three core members, and no dissent (in case of dissent, this can be solved by a vote within the core team). The core team MUST be `@`-mentioned on the relevant PR/issue and this PR/issue MUST stay open for at least one week.
```

Reviewer 2: Also we should add for completeness (to avoid namesquatting the - potentially legitimate - namesquatters): "for the duration of this process (from the time core gets pinged until an answer is given), other recipes that want to claim one of the names in question MUST NOT be merged in the staged-recipes repo (or added as an output to existing feedstocks via admin-requests)"

> - Pre-registering or squatting on a namespace in anticipation of future use is not allowed unless expressly approved by the core team via the consent of at least three core members, and no dissent (in case of dissent, this can be solved by a vote within the core team). The core team MUST be `@`-mentioned on the relevant PR/issue and this PR/issue MUST stay open for at least one week.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Pre-registering or squatting on a namespace in anticipation of future use is not allowed unless expressly approved by the core team via the consent of at least three core members, and no dissent (in case of dissent, this can be solved by a vote within the core team). The core team MUST be `@`-mentioned on the relevant PR/issue and this PR/issue MUST stay open for at least one week. For the duration of this process (from the time core gets pinged until an answer is given), no other packages can use the names in question.
```

- All artifacts uploaded from a feedstock which do not otherwise have a `feedstock epoch label` are assumed to be from the current `feedstock epoch`.
- A `feedstock epoch label` MUST be applied to any artifact from the previous epoch of the feedstock.
- The current `feedstock epoch` for a given feedstock is determined as follows. The set of all labels for all artifacts produced by the feedstock is searched for any label matching the form of a `feedstock epoch label` for that feedstock. If no label matches, then the current `feedstock epoch` is 0. If labels do match, then the current `feedstock epoch` is one plus the maximum `feedstock epoch` over all matching labels.

### Unclaimed names

> When an existing package wants to be renamed to a currently unclaimed name, the process is uncontroversial and straight-forward. Two approaches are possible:

Reviewer 2: Speaking about uncontroversial, here's an [edge case](https://github.com/conda-forge/staged-recipes/pull/31256) where even unclaimed names might become controversial: grabbing a bunch of names before real packages exit (though I understand and appreciate the upstream intention to find a name that's free both on PyPI and in conda-forge before releasing something). Not sure if we want to specify something for this, but if so, the kind of CFEP you're writing here would seem to be the right place for it.

> - The new name needs to be registered to the originating feedstock in `feedstock-outputs` (or equivalent). Once approved, a PR in the feedstock adding the new output may proceed normally. The old name MUST be kept as an alias output for backwards compatibility. In this case, the feedstock retains the name of the original name.

Reviewer 2: I think we should not mandate keeping these aliases indefinitely. In fact, it's often an explicit goal to move away from these. Of course, the compat output is necessary to help with the transition, but for various renames (e.g. `boost-cpp` -> `libboost[-devel]`, `arrow-cpp` -> `libarrow`, etc.) the compat outputs were dropped after a year or so, and I consider this right and proper.

One way that we've been cleaning up after ourselves is to add a linter rule that warns upon usage of the old names.

> - The original feedstock is archived and the package is re-submitted to `staged-recipes` (or equivalent) under the new name. The old package name MUST be added as an alias output for backwards compatibility, and MUST be registered as a valid output of the new feedstock in `feedstock-outputs`.

Reviewer 2: I'd be tempted to descope this from the first iteration of the CFEP. IMO feedstock rename handling might need its own CFEP, but I don't want to block progress here - given we have a concrete case that would need the policy - based on a concern that's not relevant to that particular case.

But basically my position is that feedstock renames should ~never happen, and if they do, they:
* need to meet a very high bar in terms of benefit[^1]
* need to go through staged-recipes
* must force-push the old history (or merge it in with `--allow-unrelated-histories`)
* provide an explanation (maybe in a pinned issue or a special README section) about the feedstock history, and where to find the relevant issues/PRs from before

[^1]: basically, I want to leave the door open for us to do foundational infra work à la https://github.com/conda-forge/ctng-compilers-feedstock/issues/188, but not make this a common occurrence in conda-forge.

### Names in use

The blanket policy in this case is that an existing package name may not be used by a different project. In exceptional cases, the old name may be reallocated provided that:

> - The old project is abandoned. Factors that can help to indicate if a project is abandoned include, but are not limited to, the project's git repo being archived, the project's distributions no longer being available (e.g., yanked artifacts on PyPI), etc.

Reviewer 2: I think we can and probably should explicitly gate this on whether the name has been "inherited" on PyPI (where applicable). We gain nothing IMO from creating gratuitous divergence by handling the situation differently than PyPI (in terms of different behaviours between `pip install foo` and `conda install foo`, and if we did, the name mapping between PyPI and conda would then also take on a temporal component)

> - There are ways to install both projects without conflicts or unintentionally installing one project versus the other.

Reviewer 2: "There are ways" is pretty vague. I also don't think this is a good benchmark TBH. If `pip install foo` means one thing before ownership was transferred, and another thing after, then enforcing that the two different projects can be installed side-by-side is unachievable in pip (and thus an unhelpful procedural gate for conda-land).

I'd go the opposite way here:
```suggestion
- The two different projects are provably impossible to be installed side-by-side, in the sense of incompatible constraints for the package metadata
  (for example, the old `foo` might only have builds that require `python <=2.7`, whereas the new `foo` would only have builds for `python >=3.10`).
```

- The old project is abandoned. Factors that can help to indicate if a project is abandoned include, but are not limited to, the project's git repo being archived, the project's distributions no longer being available (e.g., yanked artifacts on PyPI), etc. For packages shipped on both conda-forge and PyPI, the package name on PyPI MUST have been inheritied by the new project from the old project.
- The two different projects can be unambiguously distinguished in the conda-forge repodata, in the sense of incompatible constraints for the package metadata (e.g., the old `foo` might only have builds that require `python <=2.7`, whereas the new `foo` would only have builds for `python >=3.10`, the version ranges do not intersect, etc.).

> - The version ranges of the projects do not intersect.

Reviewer 2: "the version ranges do not intersect" is now duplicated across two points; also, we may want to mention epochs here. I'd add the same standard as for name-squatting here, e.g. 3 core approvals with no opposition, pinged with at least a week of reaction time, etc.
```suggestion
- The two different projects can be unambiguously distinguished in the conda-forge repodata, in the sense of incompatible constraints for the package metadata (e.g., the old `foo` might only have builds that require `python <=2.7`, whereas the new `foo` would only have builds for `python >=3.10`).
- The version ranges of the projects do not intersect. If they do, this MAY be solved in exceptional cases by incrementing the version "epoch" of the package; [verbiage for sufficient core approval]
```

Reviewer: I don't think we need to gate people on using version epochs. Let's simply delete this requirement since it is covered above.

```suggestion
- The two different projects can be unambiguously distinguished in the conda-forge repodata, in the sense of incompatible constraints for the package metadata (e.g., the old `foo` might only have builds that require `python <=2.7`, whereas the new `foo` would only have builds for `python >=3.10`, the version ranges do not intersect, etc.).
```

- The repodata patches for the old project (if any) do not change the repodata of the new project. Adjustments to the patches for the old project can be made, but they MUST produce the same modifications to the old artifacts.
- The old project's artifacts are all marked with the `broken` label. 

> - The original feedstock for the old project MUST NOT be reused, and MUST be archived.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The original feedstock for the old project is not reused, and instead MUST be archived.
```
